chivalry, and showed so much when he was provoked) and condemned for
   giving himself to his ease, and to his pleasure. To be short, the most
   learned Emperor of former times [Justinian], (at the least, the
   greatest politician) what thanks had he for cutting off the
   superfluities of the laws, and digesting them into some order and
   method? This, that he had been blotted by some to be an Epitomist, that
   is, one that extinguishes worthy whole volumes, to bring his
   abridgments into request. This is the measure that hath been rendered
   to excellent Princes in former times, even, Cum bene facerent, male
   audire, For their good deeds to be evil spoken of. Neither is there any
   likelihood, that envy and malignity died, and were buried with the
   ancient. No, no, the reproof of Moses taketh hold of most ages; "You
   are risen up in your fathers' stead, and increase of sinful men." [Num
   32:14] "What is that that hath been done? that which shall be done; and
   there is no new thing under the Sun," saith the wiseman: [Ecc 1:9] and
   S. Stephen, "As your fathers did, so do you." [Acts 7:51]

    HIS MAJESTY'S CONSTANCY, NOTWITHSTANDING CULMINATION, FOR THE SURVEY OF THE
    ENGLISH TRANSLATIONS

   This, and more to this purpose, His Majesty that now reigneth (and
   long, and long may he reign, and his offspring forever, "Himself and
   children, and children's always) knew full well, according to the
   singular wisdom given unto him by God, and the rare learning and
   experience that he hath attained unto; namely that whosoever attempteth
   anything for the public (especially if it pertain to Religion, and to
   the opening and clearing of the word of God) the same setteth himself
   upon a stage to be gloated upon by every evil eye, yea, he casteth
   himself headlong upon pikes, to be gored by every sharp tongue. For he
   that medleth with men's Religion in any part, medleth with their
   custom, nay, with their freehold; and though they find no content in
   that which they have, yet they cannot abide to hear of altering.
   Notwithstanding his Royal heart was not daunted or discouraged for this
   that colour, but stood resolute, "as a statue immovable, and an anvil
   not easy to be beaten into plates," as one [Suidas] saith; he knew who
   had chosen him to be a Soldier, or rather a Captain, and being assured
   that the course which he intended made for the glory of God, and the
   building up of his Church, he would not suffer it to be broken off for
   whatsoever speeches or practices. It doth certainly belong unto Kings,
   yea, it doth specially belong unto them, to have care of Religion, yea,
   it doth specially belong unto them, to have care of Religion, yea, to
   know it aright, yea, to profess it zealously, yea to promote it to the
   uttermost of their power. This is their glory before all nations which
   mean well, and this will bring unto them a far most excellent weight of
   glory in the day of the Lord Jesus. For the Scripture saith not in
   vain, "Them that honor me, I will honor," [1 Sam 2:30] neither was it a
   vain word that Eusebius delivered long ago, that piety towards God was
   the weapon and the only weapon, that both preserved Constantine's
   person, and avenged him of his enemies [Eusebius lib 10 cap 8].

    THE PRAISE OF THE HOLY SCRIPTURES

   But now what piety without truth? what truth (what saving truth)
   without the word of God? What word of God (whereof we may be sure)
   without the Scripture? The Scriptures we are commanded to search. John
   5:39. Isa 8:20. They are commended that searched and studied them. Acts
   17:11 and 8:28,29. They are reproved that were unskillful in them, or
   slow to believe them. Matt 22:29. Luke 24:25. They can make us wise
   unto salvation. 2 Tim 3:15. If we be ignorant, they will instruct us;
   if out of the way, they will bring us home; if out of order, they will
   reform us; if in heaviness, comfort us; if dull, quicken us; if cold,
   inflame us. Tolle, lege; Tolle, lege, Take up and read, take up and
   read the Scriptures [S. August. confess. lib 8 cap 12], (for unto them
   was the direction) it was said unto S. Augustine by a supernatural
   voice. "Whatsoever is in the Scriptures, believe me," saith the same S.
   Augustine, "is high and divine; there is verily truth, and a doctrine
   most fit for the refreshing of men's minds, and truly so tempered, that
   everyone may draw from thence that which is sufficient for him, if he
   come to draw with a devout and pious mind, as true Religion requireth."
   [S. August. de utilitcredendi cap. 6] Thus S. Augustine. and S. Jerome:
   "Ama scripturas, et amabit te sapientia etc." [S. Jerome. ad Demetriad]
   Love the Scriptures, and wisdom will love thee. And S. Cyril against
   Julian; "Even boys that are bred up in the Scriptures, become most
   religious, etc. [S. Cyril. 7 contra Iulianum] But what mention we three
   or four uses of the Scripture, whereas whatsoever is to be believed or
   practiced, or hoped for, is contained in them? or three or four
   sentences of the Fathers, since whosoever is worthy the name of a
   Father, from Christ's time downward, hath likewise written not only of
   the riches, but also of the perfection of the Scripture? "I adore the
   fulness of the Scripture," saith Tertullian against Hermogenes.
   [Tertul. advers. Hermo.] And again, to Apelles an heretic of the like
   stamp, he saith; "I do not admit that which thou bringest in (or
   concludest) of thine own (head or store, de tuo) without Scripture."
   [Tertul. de carne Christi.] So Saint Justin Martyr before him; "We must
   know by all means," saith he, "that it is not lawful (or possible) to
   learn (anything) of God or of right piety, save only out of the
   Prophets, who teach us by divine inspiration." So Saint Basil after
   Tertullian, "It is a manifest falling way from the Faith, and a fault
   of presumption, either to reject any of those things that are written,
   or to bring in (upon the head of them) any of those things that are not
   written. We omit to cite to the same effect, S. Cyril B. of Jerusalem
   in his 4::Cataches., Saint Jerome against Helvidius, Saint Augustine in
   his 3::book against the letters of Petilian, and in very many other
   places of his works. Also we forebear to descend to later Fathers,
   because we will not weary the reader. The Scriptures then being
   acknowledged to be so full and so perfect, how can we excuse ourselves
   of negligence, if we do not study them, of curiosity, if we be not
   content with them? Men talk much of [an olive bow wrapped about with
   wood, whereupon did hang figs, and bread, honey in a pot, and oil], how
   many sweet and goodly things it had hanging on it; of the Philosopher's
   stone, that it turned copper into gold; of Cornucopia, that it had all
   things necessary for food in it, of Panaces the herb, that it was good
   for diseases, of Catholicon the drug, that it is instead of all purges;
   of Vulcan's armor, that it was an armor of proof against all thrusts,
   and all blows, etc. Well, that which they falsely or vainly attributed
   to these things for bodily god, we may justly and with full measure
   ascribe unto the Scripture, for spiritual. It is not only an armor, but
   also a whole armory of weapons, both offensive and defensive; whereby
   we may save ourselves and put the enemy to flight. It is not an herb,
   but a tree, or rather a whole paradise of trees of life, which bring
   forth fruit every month, and the fruit thereof is for meat, and the
   leaves for medicine. It is not a pot of Manna, or a cruse of oil, which
   were for memory only, or for a meal's meat or two, but as it were a
   shower of heavenly bread sufficient for a whole host, be it never so
   great; and as it were a whole cellar full of oil vessels; whereby all
   our necessities may be provided for, and our debts discharged. In a
   word, it is a Panary of wholesome food, against fenowed traditions; a
   Physician's shop (Saint Basil called it) [S. Basil in Psal. primum.] of
   preservatives against poisoned heresies; a Pandect of profitable laws,
   against rebellious spirits; a treasury of most costly jewels, against
   beggarly rudiments; finally a fountain of most pure water springing up
   unto everlasting life. And what marvel? The original thereof being from
   heaven, not from earth; the author being God, not man; the inditer, the
   holy spirit, not the wit of the Apostles or Prophets; the Penmen such
   as were sanctified from the womb, and endued with a principal portion
   of God's spirit; the matter, verity, piety, purity, uprightness; the
   form, God's word, God's testimony, God's oracles, the word of truth,
   the word of salvation, etc.; the effects, light of understanding,
   stableness of persuasion, repentance from dead works, newness of life,
   holiness, peace, joy in the holy Ghost; lastly, the end and reward of
   the study thereof, fellowship with the Saints, participation of the
   heavenly nature, fruition of an inheritance immortal, undefiled, and
   that never shall fade away: Happy is the man that delighted in the
   Scripture, and thrice happy that meditateth in it day and night.

    TRANSLATION NECESSARY

   But how shall men meditate in that, which they cannot understand? How
   shall they understand that which is kept close in an unknown tongue? as
   it is written, "Except I know the power of the voice, I shall be to him
   that speaketh, a Barbarian, and he that speaketh, shall be a Barbarian
   to me." [1 Cor 14] The Apostle excepteth no tongue; not Hebrew the
   ancientest, not Greek the most copious, not Latin the finest. Nature
   taught a natural man to confess, that all of us in those tongues which
   we do not understand, are plainly deaf; we may turn the deaf ear unto
   them. The Scythian counted the Athenian, whom he did not understand,
   barbarous; [Clem. Alex. 1 Strom.] so the Roman did the Syrian, and the
   Jew (even S. Jerome himself called the Hebrew tongue barbarous, belike
   because it was strange to so many) [S. Jerome. Damaso.] so the Emperor
   of Constantinople [Michael, Theophili fil.] calleth the Latin tongue,
   barbarous, though Pope Nicolas do storm at it: [2::Tom. Concil. ex
   edit. Petri Crab] so the Jews long before Christ called all other
   nations, Lognazim, which is little better than barbarous. Therefore as
   one complaineth, that always in the Senate of Rome, there was one or
   other that called for an interpreter: [Cicero 5::de finibus.] so lest
   the Church be driven to the like exigent, it is necessary to have
   translations in a readiness. Translation it is that openeth the window,
   to let in the light; that breaketh the shell, that we may eat the
   kernel; that putteth aside the curtain, that we may look into the most
   Holy place; that removeth the cover of the well, that we may come by
   the water, even as Jacob rolled away the stone from the mouth of the
   well, by which means the flocks of Laban were watered [Gen 29:10].
   Indeed without translation into the vulgar tongue, the unlearned are
   but like children at Jacob's well (which is deep) [John 4:11] without a
   bucket or something to draw with; or as that person mentioned by
   Isaiah, to whom when a sealed book was delivered, with this motion,
   "Read this, I pray thee," he was fain to make this answer, "I cannot,
   for it is sealed." [Isa 29:11]

    THE TRANSLATION OF THE OLD TESTAMENT OUT OF THE HEBREW INTO GREEK

   While God would be known only in Jacob, and have his Name great in
   Israel, and in none other place, while the dew lay on Gideon's fleece
   only, and all the earth besides was dry; then for one and the same
   people, which spake all of them the language of Canaan, that is,
   Hebrew, one and the same original in Hebrew was sufficient. [S. August.
   lib 12 contra Faust c32] But, when the fulness of time drew near, that
   the Sun of righteousness, the Son of God should come into the world,
   whom God ordained to be a reconciliation through faith in his blood,
   not of the Jew only, but also of the Greek, yea, of all them that were
   scattered abroad; then lo, it pleased the Lord to stir up the spirit of
   a Greek Prince (Greek for descent and language) even of Ptolemy
   Philadelph King of Egypt, to procure the translating of the Book of God
   out of Hebrew into Greek. This is the translation of the Seventy
   Interpreters, commonly so called, which prepared the way for our
   Saviour among the Gentiles by written preaching, as Saint John Baptist
   did among the Jews by vocal. For the Grecians being desirous of
   learning, were not wont to suffer books of worth to lie moulding in
   Kings' libraries, but had many of their servants, ready scribes, to
   copy them out, and so they were dispersed and made common. Again, the
   Greek tongue was well known and made familiar to most inhabitants in
   Asia, by reason of the conquest that there the Grecians had made, as
   also by the Colonies, which thither they had sent. For the same causes
   also it was well understood in many places of Europe, yea, and of
   Africa too. Therefore the word of God being set forth in Greek,
   becometh hereby like a candle set upon a candlestick, which giveth
   light to all that are in the house, or like a proclamation sounded
   forth in the market place, which most men presently take knowledge of;
   and therefore that language was fittest to contain the Scriptures, both
   for the first Preachers of the Gospel to appeal unto for witness, and
   for the learners also of those times to make search and trial by. It is
   certain, that that Translation was not so sound and so perfect, but it
   needed in many places correction; and who had been so sufficient for
   this work as the Apostles or Apostolic men? Yet it seemed good to the
   holy Ghost and to them, to take that which they found, (the same being
   for the greatest part true and sufficient) rather than making a new, in
   that new world and green age of the Church, to expose themselves to
   many exceptions and cavillations, as though they made a Translations to
   serve their own turn, and therefore bearing a witness to themselves,
   their witness not to be regarded. This may be supposed to be some
   cause, why the Translation of the Seventy was allowed to pass for
   current. Notwithstanding, though it was commended generally, yet it did
   not fully content the learned, no not of the Jews. For not long after
   Christ, Aquila fell in hand with a new Translation, and after him
   Theodotion, and after him Symmachus; yea, there was a fifth and a sixth
   edition, the Authors whereof were not known. [Epiphan. de mensur. et
   ponduthentic vulgar) the same will